Title: The Vertical Fields
Author: Fielding Dawson

_In Memory of C.D.K._
On Christmas Eve around 1942, 
when I was a boy, after having the
traditional punch and cookies and after having sung 'round the
fire (my Aunty Mary at the piano), I, with my sister, my mother
and my aunts, and Emma Jackman and her son, got into Emma
Jackman's car and drove down Taylor Avenue to church for the
midnight service: I looked out the rear window at passing houses,
doors adorned with holly wreaths, I looked into windows--catching
glimpses of tinseled trees and men and women and children moving
through rooms into my mind and memory forever; the car slowed to
the corner stop at Jefferson and the action seemed like a greater
action, of Christmas in a cold damp Missouri night; patches of
snow lay on the ground and in the car the dark figures of my
mother and sister and aunts talked around me and the car began to
move along in an air of sky--at bottom dark and cold, seeming to
transform the car, my face, and hands, pressed close to the glass
as I saw my friends with their parents in their cars take the
left turn onto Argonne Drive and look for a parking place near
the church; Emma Jackman followed, and I watched heavily coated
figures make their exists, and move down the winter walk toward
the jewel-like glittering church--up the steps into the full
light of the doorway--fathers and sons and mothers and daughters
I knew and understood them all, I gazed at them with blazing
eyes: light poured from open doors; high arched stained glass
windows cast downward slanting shafts of color across the cold
churchyard, and the organ boomed inside while we parked and got
out and walked along the sidewalk, I holding my mother's right
arm, my sister held mother's left arm (mother letting us a little
support her)--down the sidewalk to join others at the warmly good
noisy familiar threshold: spirits swirled up the steps into the
church and Billy Berthold handed out the Christmas leaflets, I
gripped mine. I looked at the dominant blue illustration of Birth
in white and yellow rays moving outward to form a circle around
the Christ child's skull as Mary downward gazed; Joseph; kneeling
wisemen downward gazed; I gazed down the long center aisle at the
rising altar's dazzling cross and we moved down the aisle,
slipped in front of Mr. and Mrs. Sloan and my buddy Lorry, Mr.
and Mrs. Dart and my buddy Charles, Mr. and Mrs. Reid and my
buddy Gene and his brother Ed--we then knelt away the conscious
realization of our selves among music in the House of the Lord, I
conscious of a voice that, slowly, coarsely, wandered--the I
(eye) in see, hear me (I), we were on our feet singing, and the
choir swept down the aisle, their familiar faces moving side to
side as collective voices raised in anthem I held the hymnbook
open and my mother and sister and I sang in celebration of God
the crowded and brightly decorated--pine boughs and holly wreaths
hung around the walls with candles high on each pew, I glanced at
the gleaming cross--my spine arched, and far beyond the church,
beyond the front door, beyond the land of the last sentence in
James Joyce's _Dubliners_ a distant door seemed to open away
beyond pungent green of pine gathered around rich red hollyberry
clusters, red velvet, white-yellow center of candle flame, white
of silk, gold of tassle, and gleaming glittering eternally
cubistic gold cross and darkness of wooden beams powerfully
sweeping upward--apex for the strange smoky penuma that so
exhilarated me, I who smiled and reeled in a vast cold cold gaze
down at myself listening to Charles Kean's Christian
existentialist sermon in time before the plate was passed and the
choir had singing, gone, and we were outside, I standing by my
sister; my mother and aunts were shaking Charles's hand, I shook
that solid hand warmly, and I walked down the steps, my mother
and sister and aunts again, again, once again it rushed through
me taking my breath, my spine arched toward trees and streets
walking slowly breathing deep I moved down the sidewalk, eyes
crystallizing streets yards houses and all lives within; my
perception forked upward through treetops into the vertical
fields of space, and a moment later, in the crowded back seat of
the car, as Emma Jackman started the engine, I breathed vapor on
the rear window, and with my finger, I signed my name.